So let's talk about how you
actually get the estimates,
or how R or
whatever figures these things out.
And I'm gonna go through a derivation,
and again, if this is not your thing,
then feel free to skip over
this part of the lecture.
Remember if you have
regression to the origin,
you want a line that's forced to
the origin that has no intercepts.
You have the single predictor x and
a single predictor of y and
you want no intercept.
The slope estimate was just this
sum of the product x times y
divided by the sum of the x is squared.
That, we talked about that
earlier on in the class.
Now let's just consider,
let's see if we can use that result to
derive the least squares estimate
when we have two regressors.
And then I think if you've got the gist
of this you can see how it would work for
three and how it would work for
four and so on.
Okay, so derive is maybe a bit of
an ambitious term as to what I
intend to do here.
What I guess I mean is develop,
and I'm gonna ask for
those that are interested to fill
in the details on their own.
But what I'm gonna do is simply
develop the estimator a little bit.
And the reason I'm gonna go through
this development is I think it
illustrates what multivariable
regression is doing.
If you're not too interested in this sort
of development, then I think you could
reasonably skip over this slide or
this set of notes and not worry about it.
But if you're interested, and
you kinda wanna understand
how multi-variable regression works,
I'm gonna give a development that's
more intuitive than what you would get
with something like linear algebra.
In addition I have some videos on YouTube
where I go through the linear algebra
development if you'd like to watch those.
But I don't think that that's actually
necessary to sort of understand
what's going on.
So let's consider two regressors.
We have summation of the outcome yi,
minus the first regressor
Xi1 times Beta 1,
minus the second regressor,
Xi2, X2i times Beta 2 squared.
That's the least squares criteria
that we would like to minimize.
So for example,
X1i might just be an intercept and
X2i might be a covariant of interest,
blood pressure or something like that.
Okay, so here's the trick.
Imagine if I were to just know beta 1 or
fix beta 1.
Then I get yi~ let's say is equal
to yi minus- x1i times beta 1.
And this equation becomes summation
yi~ minus X2i beta 2 squared.
Well, then this is exactly
regression through the origin
with just the single regressor,
X2y but the outcome y~i.
So we know what the estimate for
beta 2 would have to be.
It would have to be summation yi~.
x2i over summation x2i squared.
Now, what you can do, this,
and remember, yi~, see,
remember its definition over here.
If we were to plug it in,
that's a function of beta 1.
So what I could do is now that I know that
my beta 2 has to satisfy this equation.
I can take this and
plug it back in here, right.
Or equivalently back in here.
And then what that yields
is an equation for
that only involves beta 1 and
a regression through the origin for
beta 1 and if you want to you can
fill in the rest of the details.
What it works out to be, and
this is the interesting part,
is that the regression slope for beta one,
is exactly what you would obtain if
you took the residual of x2 out of x1,
and x2 out of y and
then just did regression to the origin.
So kind of what multi-variable regression
is doing is it's the coefficient for
x1, say beta 1,
is the coefficient having removed x2,
the other covariant, from both
the response and that first predictor, x1.
Similarly, the regression coefficient for
x2 beta 2 is going to be
what you get if you were to
remove x1 out of both the response y and
out of the second predictor, x2.
We're gonna go over this point a lot and
I know it's probably
confusing to begin with.
But it explains what multi-variable
regression is doing.
A coefficient from
a multi-variable regression
is the coefficient where all
the other variables have been.
Their linear effect on that predictor and
their response has been removed.
And this is a very useful fact.
And we'll exploit it in a variety of ways.
So in case you skipped over that previous
slide I wanted to go through the result.
Because it's important for
your understanding of
multi-variable regression.
So remember, we have two covariants
in this case, an X1 and an X2.
And of course, one outcome Y.
And we're interested in a model that
has only the two covariants and
a regression slope Beta 1 and then
regression slope Beta 2 for the second.
The result is that the fitted coefficient
for beta 1 is what you would get
with regression through the origin if I
had removed the second coefficient X2.
If I had removed its linear effect
from both the response Y and
the first regression variable X1.
So that's the sense in which multivariable
regression, the sense in which
the coefficient for X1 has been adjusted
for the effect of X2 because the linear
fact of X2 has been removed from both
the response Y and the first predictor X1.
Similarly, the same thing could be said
about the coefficient for X2 beta 2.
Once we get its estimate,
beta 2 hat, it is what you would get
if you were to remove the effect,
the linear effect of X1 out of both the
response Y, and the second predictor, X2.
And this is why multivariable regression
relationships are sort of thought of as
having been adjusted for
all the other variables.
We'll go on in the next slide and
talk about how this relates
to a full multivariable regression,
where you have lots of predictors.
So let's go through the case that we
already know, of simple linear regression.
Where one of our co-variances
is an intercept term and
the other is some co-variant of interest.
So here we have Yi equals Beta 1 X1i, plus
Beta 2, X2i, where in this case I'm just
gonna assume that the second one is the
intercept term whereas we usually assume
that the first one is the intercept
term but that of course doesn't matter.
So if we adhere to my rule that the beta
one co, the estimated beta one coefficient
is gonna be the one that's obtained by
getting rid of X2 out of the both Y term
and the X1 term, let's think about what
we would get if we fitted X2 on Y.
Well X2 is just an intercept.
So as we know in intercept only regression
the fitted value is just Y bar.
And so the residuals are just
the observations Yi minus Y bar.
In other words the centered
version of the Ys.
And then if we were to fit X2 on X1,
again, X2 is just a constant.
If we were to do the fit,
the fitted values,
the coefficient would just be X1 bar,
the mean of that covariant.
And so the residuals would
just be X1i minus X bar,
the centered version of that covariant.
So, getting rid of this intercept term
from the Y is just centering that variable
and getting rid of this intercept term
from X1 is just centering that covariant.
And then my fitted regression
estimate is given down here,
is just the product of the centered
Ys times the centered Xs,
added up, divided by the sum
of the centered Xs squared.
I give you that formula here and you can
work with it and it just works out to be
the standard regression slope,
the correlation between the Xs and
the Ys, times the ratio of
the standard deviations.
So now let's extend this to
more than two variables, so
that we can start dipping into
the idea of multivariable regression.
So hopefully you see where we're
going with multivariable regression.
Our least squares criteria is now the
distance between our observed outcome, Yi,
and X1 times its coefficient all
the way up to Xp times its coefficient,
the squared distances between those.
If we only have two regressors,
an intercept and
a slope, this amounts to minimizing
the sum of the squared vertical distances
between the outcomes Ys and the predictors
and the prediction on the line.
If it's three regressors, an intercept and
two regression variables,
then the fitted line or
the fitted construct
is no longer a line, it's a plane and
the least squares criteria is minimizing
the sum of the squared vertical distances
between the outcomes in the plane.
If we take more than three variables and
intercept and
then let's say three covariants then,
we can't visualize it any more.
So but it's sort of the generalized
idea of the distance,
the vertical distance between the Ys and
some generalized version of a plane.
And what we've seen is the idea that
multi variable regression adjusts for
the other variables in
a sense by taking residuals.
So, for example, if we take this
coefficient in front of X1, beta 1,
the way in which we interpret Beta 1, is
that the remaining regression variables,
X2 up to Xp,
have been linearly removed from both Y and
X1 and then the relationship between those
residuals investigated by themselves.
So in a sense, Y has been adjusted for
the remaining variables, X1 has been
adjusted for the remaining variables, and
we look at those two together so that beta
1 can be thought of as an adjusted effect,
having adjusted for a linear
relationship with the other variables.
So what we're gonna do now is go through
some computer experiments just illustrate
that this is how LM works, and then in
the next lecture we're going to through
some examples and how we interpret
the coefficients in a context.